Facilitation (ROUGH DRAFT)

You are not the smartest person in the room.  Ok I hope that helped grab your
attention, I promise I will come back to this statement later.
My intent in this article is to have you take a step back, and
realize what it is you are trying to accomplish when facilitation a meeting.
You might be approaching it the wrong way, which adds stress, which makes
for a long day.  For most of us they are already too long, so let me dive a
little deeper.

Let me take a look at your possible background.  Maybe you were a project
manager who was in charge of lining up all the meetings and making sure nothing
was missed. Or maybe a business analyst who have to deliver the information
to a group of critical people wanting to poke holes in your logic or data the
second something sounded a bit off.  If you come from this type of background
you like to set up your meetings a day, a couple days, or sometimes a week
in advance.  This would help you prepare your presentation, cover all
the facts, and be prepared to answer every question that came up.  Well I am
telling you to forget those days and try to adapt to a simpler approach.

Stop preparing so much before facilitating a meeting.  Wait what, did he just
say that? what you want me to go in blind!!!  No that's not exactly it, but
partially yes.  With a Scrum Environment you need to be on your toes, the
work comes faster and the meetings do as well.  You need to trim something, and
starting here is not a shortcut.  Let be straightforward, I am not telling
you to walk into a meeting, kick up your shoes on the desk and say "Yeah, ugh
we gotta talk about 'x' so who wants to start."  I suggest going in attempting
to accomplish these 3 things.

1. What is the meeting about (duh)
2. What is the goal of the Meeting
3. What and who own the takeaways

Now you don't have to have the answer to the number 3 right away, but if you
are facilitating a group of 5, or 25, level setting the first two expectations
will help the meeting run smoother from the start.

OK great, I have the number 1 and 2 set, and I am driving towards number 3,
now what!  I didn't prep anything, I don't have anything to lead with, what
now!!!  Remember when I said you weren't the smartest person in the room? Of
course you do, well you're not and by all means this is A GOOD THING.  Look
around the room, guess who is smart....the people you invited to the meeting!
Focus on them, pick up a marker, and start listening.

At this point its time to think extraction, not inception.  You are not trying
to give them your ideas and make them your own (sometimes this is the case
but not in the instance we are discussing).  So not only do I not want you to be
the smartest person in the room, but be the dumbest.  Ok now your loosing me,
I don't think I can do that.  My point is this, everyone is willing to tell
you what they know, and most the time in a very detailed manner to show you
that they know what they are talking about, and that they are, in fact, intelligent
(which they are).

When you listen, write, and put the dots together then you are learning.  Yes,
I am not telling you to get facts from these people and just move on, you need
to write them down, connect the dots, learn what it is they are saying.  This
then allows you to start asking questions, start poking holes, and start
contributing to a meeting you may have known nothing about to start with!

Theory sounds great Mike, does this actually work.  Let me give you an example:

"Hey Mike what do you know about cloud."
"I don't know shit to be honest.....but give me an hour and let me see what
I can come up with"

Jump in a room with the performance Team.
"Hey guys are we using cloud?"
"Of course we are using cloud"
"Ok cool, what are we using it for"
"Right now we are using it for perf servers"
"All of them?"
"No actually only 3, and we had to create a new Agent to push the data
to the cloud."
"Ah ok, so we have 3 of our perf servers, using an agent that pushes our
data to the \cloud.....why are we putting it there (start drawing a diagram
on the board.)"  And on and on and on......

(One Hour later)

"Hey Mike, you know anything about cloud"
"Take a seat, let me explain"

Now don't take this the wrong way.  In 1 hour I still don't know the intricacies
of how Cloud development and data pushing work.  But I can speak
intelligently on the subject because I had some very intelligent people give
me the answers.  So much so that you can present in front of someone else and
they will know that you at least have the understanding of the topic.

So I hope I'm not selling this as some sort of a trick, the fact is you
can learn A LOT if you simply do the following:

1. Check your intelligence pride at the door
2. Listen carefully
3. Write down what you hear and make sure you understand before moving on

I will guess that halfway through the meeting you will be asking some
intelligent questions that help drive the outcome of the meeting and help
you get concrete takeaways for your goal.....because you are also an intelligent
person :)
