# Mystery Minutes #

*Problem*: Scrum Masters are supposed to be masters of scrum.  As such, when they observe inconsistent behavior or hear comments that suggest misunderstandings, they need to be able to correct through education.  Newly minted scrum masters may be able to come up with cogent arguments — after the fact.  It is much harder to quickly think on your feet and explain your reasoning to turn a situation into an educational opportunity.  That is where this exercise comes in.  It uses extemporaneous speaking in a safe environment for practice and feedback.  Kevin uses this in his SM CoP with good results.

 

1)      Purpose

    You = leaders
    Value = teach & improve
    Practice Extemporaneous speech

2)      Loosely based on LBC’s “Mystery Hour” (can find it on iTune Podcast…usually in the top 10 of comedy)

    The show is a radio call-in where individuals call in with a “mystery”; something they don’t have an answer to but are sure it has an answer.  Someone else calls in with the answer to the mystery.
    We are looking for questions that Feature Team, Practice Leads, etc.  believe is some mystery; but the SMs can answer.

3)      RULES of the Game:

    Rule 1 is that it’s a safe zone.  You are allowed to say anything & expect to get help not criticism. 
    Ask everyone to write questions on notecards.  Questions that have answers.  Questions that people have asked and they were able to answer, things they didn’t know the answer to, frequently asked questions, etc.
    Collect the cards & shuffle into one stack of cards.
    Game clock is set to 1.5 minutes times the number of people (this usually allows each person to answer 1 – 3 questions in a round)
    When the time starts; first person grabs the first card off top of deck & reads it aloud.
    S/he then proceeds to answer the question immediately – taking as little or as much time as needed to answer adequately.
    Next person draws and so on.
    As each person speaks, everyone else is taking notes on at least one thing they liked & one thing that could be better.
    When time is up; go back through the answered cards in order so everyone can share the feedback.

           i.  I encourage people to take notes on what stands out, the game moves quickly so the feedback can’t be the thing they did “best” or needs “most” improvement.  It’s just one thing.  Could be style, language choice, body language, content of the answer, etc. 

           ii.  I’ve learned that moving quickly the answers as well as during the feedback round allows people to speak honestly.  No time to polish the answer or sugar-coat it.  People have really responded and received feedback that we often don’t give each other (like “your answer was perfect, every word was spot on; but your rolled your eyes when you heard the question therefore I didn’t believe the answer”).

4)      Variations/Tips:

    Usually have the person answering stand.  Trying to replicate the same circumstances and body language that they normally have when asked the questions for real.
    We have played where the person had to run to the front of a big room to draw the card & “project” the answer to the audience at the other end.
    If playing multiple rounds, we sometimes let people answer the same question they answered before – trying to better themselves.
    I haven’t tried it yet; but I want to play the game where everyone answers the same question – building on what they liked or didn’t like in the previous persons answer
    The deck of “mysteries” is filled with questions about Scrum, Lean/Agile, and work things – so I like to plant a few questions from the Mystery Hour show.  Usually no one knows the answer, but it adds some laughter to watch someone make up an answer and try to be believable.

            i.  My favorite; “What was # (hashtag) used for before there was Twitter?”  Answer: the origin is traced back to map makers.  They would use the # to plot out a village in the center of the # and the surrounding farm/plots of land around it.

 

NB you definitely want to collect cards from everyone before playing, as this is local context.  To seed your deck you can also include some of these starters: Scrum Mysteries.xlsx
